1.Explain the key differences between SQL and NoSQL databases with examples.

SQL databases are relational databases that store data in tables with predefined schemas. They follow a structured format using rows and columns, and relationships between data are maintained using keys. SQL databases ensure high consistency and are best suited for structured data.

NoSQL databases are non-relational databases that store data in flexible formats such as documents, key-value pairs, graphs, or wide-column stores. They do not require a fixed schema, making them suitable for semi-structured or unstructured data. NoSQL databases are designed for horizontal scalability and high performance.

In summary:
SQL → structured, fixed schema, strong consistency
NoSQL → flexible schema, scalable, handles large and varied data

2.What does the CAP theorem state, and why can’t a distributed system guarantee all three
properties?

The CAP theorem states that a distributed database system can provide only two out of the following three properties simultaneously:

Consistency (C): Every read receives the most recent write or an error
Availability (A): Every request receives a response, even if it may not be the latest data
Partition Tolerance (P): The system continues to function despite network failures

In a distributed system, network partitions are unavoidable, so Partition Tolerance must always be supported. Therefore, a system must choose between Consistency and Availability during a partition.

This is why it is impossible for a distributed system to guarantee all three properties at the same time.

3.Describe three scenarios where MongoDB would be preferred over a relational database.

MongoDB is preferred over relational databases in the following situations:

Dynamic or Evolving Schema:
When the structure of data changes frequently, MongoDB allows flexible document-based storage without requiring schema modifications.
Large-Scale Data and High Throughput:
Applications such as social media, analytics, and real-time systems require horizontal scaling, which MongoDB supports efficiently.
JSON-like Data Storage:
When applications use JSON data (e.g., web APIs), MongoDB stores data in a similar format, making it easy to integrate and process.

4.Why does MongoDB use BSON internally instead of storing documents as JSON?

MongoDB uses BSON (Binary JSON) instead of JSON for internal storage because:

BSON is a binary-encoded format, which allows faster data processing and traversal
It supports additional data types such as Date, ObjectId, and Binary data, which are not supported in JSON
BSON provides efficient storage and indexing, improving database performance

Thus, BSON enhances both performance and functionality compared to JSON.

5.Write MongoDB queries to find all students with GPA above 3.5 and enrolled in “CS101”.

db.students.find({
  GPA: { $gt: 3.5 },
  course: "CS101"
})